Objective

The objective of this task is to understand how Cloud Databases work by creating a managed SQL database instance (MySQL) in the cloud, connecting to it, and performing basic CRUD operations.
This helps in learning Database-as-a-Service (DBaaS) concepts and how to work with cloud-managed databases securely.

Tools & Platform Used: 

Platform: Google Cloud Platform (GCP)
Service: Cloud SQL (MySQL 8.0)
Access Method: Cloud Shell Terminal
SQL Client: MySQL CLI (via Cloud Shell)
Region: Asia-South (Mumbai)

🪜 Steps Followed
1️⃣ Create a Cloud SQL Instance

Opened Google Cloud Console → SQL → Create Instance.
Selected MySQL as the database engine.
Gave the instance name: task5-sql-demo.

Configured:
Region: Asia-South (Mumbai)
Tier: db-f1-micro (Free tier)
Root user password: (set during creation)
Clicked Create Instance and waited for provisioning to complete.

2️⃣ Configure Access

Enabled public IP access for easy testing.
Added authorized networks for secure connection (automatically managed by Cloud Shell).
Verified instance status as RUNNABLE.

3️⃣ Connect to Database Using Cloud Shell

Opened Cloud Shell from the top-right console icon and ran: gcloud sql connect task5-sql-demo --user=root
Entered password when prompted (input is invisible — normal behavior). Successfully connected to the MySQL monitor.

4️⃣ Create a Database and Table:
Executed the following SQL commands:

CREATE DATABASE intern_demo;
USE intern_demo;

CREATE TABLE students (
  id INT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY,
  name VARCHAR(50),
  domain VARCHAR(30),
  score INT
);


✅ Database and table created successfully.

5️⃣ Insert and View Data
INSERT INTO students (name, domain, score)
VALUES 
('Aarav', 'Cloud', 95),
('Diya', 'DevOps', 89),
('Varun', 'Data', 92);

SELECT * FROM students;


Output:

id	name	domain	score
1	Aarav	Cloud	95
2	Diya	    DevOps	89
3	Varun	Data	92

6️⃣ Disconnect and Cleanup exit;


Stopped instance to avoid unnecessary billing.

🧠 Learnings / Outcomes

Understood how Cloud SQL provides a managed MySQL environment.
Learned how to connect securely using Cloud Shell without local setup.
Practiced SQL commands in a cloud-hosted database.
Gained clarity on database provisioning, connectivity, and CRUD operations in the cloud.

📷 Deliverables Included

Screenshot of Cloud SQL instance (running)
Screenshot of successful MySQL connection
Screenshot of table creation and data insertion
This report file (Task5_Report_Varun.txt)

✅ Conclusion

This task demonstrated how cloud databases simplify management and scaling.
Using Google Cloud SQL, I successfully created, connected, and operated on a MySQL database instance entirely in the cloud environment.